Woo hoo.
It's finally time to learn our very first data structure and one that most likely you're very familiar
with.
Arrays arrays which are sometimes called lists organizes items sequentially.
That means one after another in memory.
Kind of like we have here we have some sort of data at index 0 let's say juice.
And then right after at index 1 we have something else maybe Apple.
Maybe this is a grocery list in our computers memory.
They'll be one after another because remember our Ram is a lot bigger than just seven slots and the
Rays are probably the simplest and most widely used data structures.
And luckily for us we're starting with this because arrays have the least amount of rules and because
they're stored in contiguous memory.
That is in order.
They also have the smallest footprint of any data structure so if all you need is to store some data
and iterate over it that is go one by one step by step arrays are the best choice especially if you
know the indices that is here on the left of the items your story and just as a quick glance and we'll
go over this in more detail in later videos but look up or access with arrays are constant time of one.
It's super super fast.
Other actions or methods that we're gonna go over.
So just push are also fast but then inserts and deletes r o of N or linear time.
But in order to demonstrate arrays let's actually use code to show you an example.
We have our little playground over here and again you can use whichever language you prefer.
I'm just going to demonstrate this in javascript we can create a simple array let's call it strings
and this array again using these square bracket notation will have a then b then c and d and we just
we've just created an array in JavaScript now looking at this and based on what we've learned so far
we can make a couple of assumptions for example to store the letter a letter B.
Let us see letter D.
That's 1 2 3 4 4 items.
If we were on a 32 bit system that is we have 1 2 3 4 shelves to store the letter A in zeros and ones.
Well if that's the case we just multiply 4 times for so for items and each item taking up for shelves
in our memory that means we're using up 20 or 16 bytes of storage.
If we remember now a little example here that with a 32 bit system we have 1 2 3 4 shelves to store
this this number.
Again this is a bit of a simplified version of looking at it but I hope you see what we're doing here
we're simply storing a b c d in sequential order in our ram our random access memory so the computer
now knows where to find these items therefore when I do strings to I'm telling the computer hey go to
the array called strings.
You should know where that is because underneath the hood you stored it for me.
And grab the third item.
Remember the indexes are 0 1 2.
So grab the third item from where the array is stored on your memory and if I run this I'll get C the
computer is going to grab that information for me because here it's stored it for me and here it's grabbing
it for me.
All right.
So let's do a few more operations with arrays and see what the pros and cons are well in JavaScript
we have a few methods that we can use with the race.
One is push which simply allows us to add something at the end of the array.
So strings dot push e and if we just remove this and lets out a console dot log of strings if I run
this I get a B C D E this string push operation because it just adds it at the end of the array.
Is an 0 1 operation all we're doing is adding whatever item we want at the end.
We're not looping through anything so hopefully that makes sense.
Why that would be a one that's very convenient.
What's another method that we get.
We can also use pop and pop is the opposite of Push Pop will simply mean to remove the last item from
the strings from the array.
If I click Run here you see that the E was moved.
If I do strings dot pop again and hit run we see that this time around we've added e.
Then we removed E.
And then finally D to be left with a B and C what do you think.
The time complexity of this operation is once again it's 0 of 1 because we're not looping through anything
we're just removing the last side.
I remember our computer knows where last item is stored we're simply saying go to index of let's say
7.
The very last item and remove the bread but let's do something interesting here now.
What if we want to OD an item at the beginning of the array maybe in here we want to add the letter
X Well we have something called on shift in JavaScript and depending on your language you'll have perhaps
something different but the idea here is we simply do strings dot on shift and by the way you see here
how rappel that I.T. actually gives you the parameters that you can enter in this case.
It just says what items which is a strength should I enter.
In our case I'll say I want to on shift X which is saying just add X at the beginning of the array.
If I click Run here we see that X has been added at the beginning of our array.
What do you think the time complexity of this operation is.
And by the way as we go through data structures and because we know they go notation isn't it pretty
cool that we're able to think about code beyond just oh I'm just doing this.
We can think deeply about what's happening underneath the hood.
Why might this operation be longer than this operation.
I find that fascinating and when I first understood this point it really made me a better engineer and
I hope you're starting to get this aha moment for you as well.
Especially if this is your first time with data structures now on shift what are we doing here.
Well remember strings are essentially stored if I move this to a new line the computer knows that this
is at 0.
This is at index of 1
this is that index of two and this is at index of three when I add X with the on shift I'm all of a
sudden adding x into our array but we now have to shift these numbers because the indexes are still
like this but this time around we have to say OK zero is now at X a is now one B is now two and c is
at index 3 and D is that index for and just by me doing this you might have seen something we just iterated
loop through everything and reassigned the indexes and I did one two three four five moves or five operations
to realign the indexes and this should give you a hint that is this operation is 0 of and depending
on the size of the array that's how long it's going to take to do that operation we're looping so right
away we know that with the raise maybe it's not the best data structure for adding items at the beginning
of the array What if we wanted to add something in the middle of the array so we can use the method
splice here let me scroll down a bit and with Splice I can say strings dot splice and again I get a
hint of what I can do.
The first is the start number.
So I want to start at index of 2 and remember we have this array here X a b c.
So we're starting at B and the second parameter is the delete count.
What do we want to delete or how many things from this index do we want to delete in our case we don't
want to delete anything which we want to add so I'll say 0 and then the items that we want to add.
So let's just add a string that says alien and let's remove this X from our original array that's better
let's hit run and there we go we have X because we've en shifted a then alien b c so splice told us
go to index of 2 0 1 2 where B was initially and add alien instead of B and just shift things over.
So what we've done here is if we go back to our example we have the X in our array and we shifted these
indexes of X and a are still the same but we shifted b over and said in here I want you to add alien
and we now have to go over everything and say to for alien we want three four B four for C and five
for D.
So what's our big O here.
And we don't need this come well our big O.
In this case we did half of the operations because we changed half the array we looped through half
the array so it would be 0 of and divided by two.
But remember our rules when it comes to bingo we remove constants and simplify to just all then.
Worst case it's going to be o of an operation.
All right I'm going to leave this for you so I can play around and try different methods on a race but
I hope you understand how they work and how there's some good things that we can do such as accessing
the array that is of one because it's well extremely fast we know exactly where it is in memory we can
push and pop but when it comes to on shifting or splicing or even deleting because with Splice we can
even do delete that's going to be oh event and if we go back to our chart we should now have a better
understanding of why arrays look ups are extremely fast we know where they are we know why push adding
at the end of the array is extremely fast but why inserting and deleting might not be the best or the
fastest when it comes to race but here's the thing there's actually two types of arrays and in the next
video we're going to talk about these two types I'll see and that one by.